[istio] Add ambient mesh documentation (#21084)
deckhouse/deckhouse: modules/110-istio/docs/README.md

- [Improving Observability](#observability).
- [Organizing a multi-datacenter cluster by joining clusters into a single Service Mesh (multicluster)](#multicluster).
- [Grouping isolated clusters into a federation with the ability to provide native (in the Service Mesh sense) access to selected services](#federation).

> - [Joining the mesh without per-Pod sidecars using ambient mode](#ambient-mesh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Joining the mesh without per-pod sidecars using ambient mode](#ambient-mesh).
```

cluster-b     d8-istio/istio-remote-secret-cluster-b     synced     istiod-v1x21-5c57d85b54-k8pl7
```

## Ambient mesh

{% alert level="warning" %}

> Available in Enterprise Edition and Certified Security Edition Pro only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Available in Enterprise Edition only.
```

{% endalert %}

{% alert level="warning" %}
Ambient mesh support is experimental and not recommended for production use.
{% endalert %}

> Besides the classic sidecar mode, Istio can run the data plane in *ambient* mode. In this mode the mesh functionality is split into two layers, and application Pods no longer get a per-Pod `istio-proxy` sidecar container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the classic sidecar mode, Istio can run the data plane in *ambient* mode. In this mode, the mesh functionality is split into two layers, and application pods no longer get a per-pod `istio-proxy` sidecar container:
```

- A node-level component (`ztunnel`) handles L4 functionality (mutual TLS, identity, basic authorization) for all mesh workloads on the node.
- An optional per-namespace component (a *waypoint* proxy) handles L7 functionality (HTTP routing, L7 authorization, telemetry).

> Compared to the sidecar mode, ambient mode reduces per-Pod overhead (no sidecar container injected into every Pod) and lets you adopt mesh features incrementally — first L4 via `ztunnel`, then L7 only for the namespaces that need it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to the sidecar mode, ambient mode reduces per-pod overhead (no sidecar container injected into every pod) and lets you adopt mesh features incrementally — first L4 via `ztunnel`, then L7 only for the namespaces that need it.
```

> ### Components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Components

The following components are used in the ambient mode:
```

- `ztunnel` — a DaemonSet that runs one Pod per node and transparently tunnels traffic of the ambient workloads on that node over [HBONE](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/) (HTTP-Based Overlay Network Encapsulation) with mutual TLS. It provides L4 features without a sidecar.

> - waypoint proxy — an optional L7 proxy deployed per namespace (or for a subset of its workloads/services). In DKP it is provisioned through the [`WaypointInstance`](cr.html#waypointinstance) Custom Resource, which is a DKP abstraction on top of the native Istio waypoint provisioning. It adds declarative management of replicas (`Static`/`HPA`), resources (`Static`/`VPA`), node placement, and disruption budgets per waypoint instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ztunnel`: A DaemonSet that runs one pod per node and transparently tunnels traffic of the ambient workloads on that node over [HTTP-Based Overlay Network Encapsulation (HBONE)](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/architecture/) with mutual TLS. It provides L4 features without a sidecar.
- **Waypoint proxy**: An optional L7 proxy deployed per namespace (or for a subset of its workloads and services). In DKP, it is provisioned through the [WaypointInstance](cr.html#waypointinstance) custom resource, which is a DKP abstraction on top of the native Istio waypoint provisioning. It adds declarative management of replicas (`Static`/`HPA`), resources (`Static`/`VPA`), node placement, and disruption budgets (PDB) per waypoint instance.
```

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites

To use the ambient mode, make sure to follow these requirements:
```

- Use Istio 1.25 or newer (ambient mode is available starting with Istio 1.25).
- Set [`dataPlane.trafficRedirectionSetupMode`](configuration.html#parameters-dataplane-trafficredirectionsetupmode) to `CNIPlugin`. Ambient mode requires the CNI plugin to set up traffic redirection.
- Enable ambient mode via the [`ambient.enabled`](configuration.html#parameters-ambient-enabled) module parameter.

### Enrolling workloads

> The module installs and runs the ambient infrastructure (`ztunnel`, and the waypoint controller for `WaypointInstance` resources), but it does **not** enroll your workloads automatically. Enrollment is done with standard Istio labels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The module installs and runs the ambient infrastructure (`ztunnel` and the waypoint controller for WaypointInstance resources), but it **does not** enroll your workloads automatically.

To enroll workloads, use the standard Istio labels:
```

- Add the `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` label to a namespace (or Pod) to capture its traffic with `ztunnel` (L4).

> - Create a [`WaypointInstance`](cr.html#waypointinstance) in the namespace, then point workloads or services at it with the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label to enable L7 features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` label to a namespace (or pod) to capture its traffic with `ztunnel` (L4).
1. Create a [WaypointInstance](cr.html#waypointinstance) resource in the namespace, then point workloads or services at it with the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label to enable L7 features.
```

Author: Fixed using 1-2 numbering, not sure if it's ok: https://github.com/deckhouse/deckhouse/pull/21084/changes/696c2307cf3f0d9f50981ba8c240e89b42c2af8a

> See [examples of using ambient mesh](examples.html#ambient-mesh) for step-by-step configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the ["Examples"](examples.html#ambient-mesh) section for step-by-step configuration.
```

{% alert level="warning" %}

> Do not disable ambient mode while `WaypointInstance` resources still exist in the cluster. With ambient mode disabled, the waypoint controller is not running and cannot reconcile or clean up waypoint resources. Delete all `WaypointInstance` resources before disabling ambient mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete all WaypointInstance resources before disabling ambient mode. With ambient mode disabled, the waypoint controller is not running and cannot reconcile or clean up waypoint resources.
```
